---
siteTitle: How I Flipped the Classroom
---

# The Flipped Classroom or:
## How I Learned to Stop Lecturing and Love My Students

In Spring 2013, when I was asked to teach Calculus III at Notre Dame, I
designed a new set of techniques which literally turned my class around.
Here I'd like to explain all of the things that I tried, what I learned,
and what I would like to try in the future.

## Part 1: The Plan

One of my biggest sources of information was a lecture I attended about
the value and practice of teaching "problem solving techniques". This
led me to read George Polya's *How to Solve It*, a book on the topic of
problem solving.

After attending this and several other similar lectures on pedagogy and
course design, I desided to design my course from the ground up. There
were a couple of restrictions:

1. As I was only teaching a single section (there were three others),
   and was only a grad student, I would not be able to adjust any of the
assignments or exams, or indeed deviate from the grading pattern
outlined for the course.
2. Similarly, I was not able to deviate in any way from the schedule
   (which lesson on which day).
3. My textbook had already been chosen.

(Truthfully, none of these turned out to be a major obstacle)

I decided that the goal of my course, in accordance with everything that
I knew about the university's desires and the majors/departments of my
students, revolved around teaching problem solving strategies to
students, especially dealing with multidimensional calculus. This is by
no means surprising, but it is important to have a clear idea of what
the goal of a course is before structuring the course.

### Question 1: How do I teach students to solve problems?

Answer: By making them solve problems, with guidance. It's similar to
teaching anyone any hands-on skill. You show them how it is done (as
briefly as is possible), then you walk with them while they do it, then
you make them do it on their own, providing guidance and feedback.

In the classroom, I decided that this could be accomplished by:

1. Doing short, introductory examples myself at the board, with emphasis
   on common mistakes and plenty of opportunity for questions.
2. Breaking students into groups to work on much harder, longer
   problems. During this time, I visit each group to keep them on track,
ask difficult (and guiding) questions, and help them if they get stuck
(or distracted).
3. Having each group present to the class, with emphasis not on the
   answer, but on how they arrived at the answer (including false trails
followed). The act of presenting forces students to examine their own
techniques and how they might be generalized. The act of viewing other
presentations exposes students to new viewpoints, especially the
important lessons from their peers.

### Question 2: When will they learn the material?

Answer: At home. If I do all of those things in class, I won't have any
time to lecture. The students won't be able to solve problems about
derivatives if they don't know what a derivative is. The only time that
remains, then, is time outside of the class.

### Question 3: How will I get the students to learn material at home?

Answer: I will create video lectures for them to watch.

I've discovered that students hate reading math textbooks. This is fair:
a mathematics textbook has to walk the line between being interesting,
being concise, and containing all of the necessary facts. Most (indeed,
all that I have ever read) end up being dry at the best, and unreadable
at the worst. They make great references, but require fantastic amounts
of dedication to read end-to-end.

In fact, I had experimented with forcing students to read their books at
home in a previous course, with very limited success. Even when they did
make an effort, they came away confused, bored, and tired. I spent some
time deciding who to blame: my students (for being undisciplined), their
previous teachers/parents (for not giving them the right kind of
discipline), the textbook (for being too boring/long/confusing/etc.),
the material itself, or the time of the class. Eventually, I decided to
blame myself, for attempting to force my students to do something that
they clearly did not want to do and were extremely bad at. However,
every university student is adept at distilling facts from a lecture.

Truthfully, while lecturing is certainly not exciting, a good lecturer
can make even the most mundane material tolerable. I don't claim that I
have these gifts, but I'm pretty sure that I can beat out reading a calc
book.

### Question 4: How can I make my lecture easier to digest?

Answer: Make it concise.

There are actually a few options here, but I decided that the best way
to help my students watch the video lectures at home would be to make
them as short as possible. I aimed for no more than 20 minutes per class
(so 20 minutes every other night).

This turned out to be easier than it sounds. Normally, such a lecture
would last most of 50 minutes. But that includes pacing, lots of
examples, answering questions, etc. Of course, I had no questions to
answer, and since I would be doing examples during class, I could cut
out any examples that weren't absolutely necessary, and replace the rest
with the shortest possible example fitting the situation.

Basically, each video covered any new concepts, new vocabulary, and just
enough examples to be concrete.

### Question 5: How can I be sure that the videos are being watched?

Answer: Make it necessary.

Firstly, I could start each class with a very short assessment of basic
comprehension from the previous night's video. Questions that should be
easy if they watched the video, but very difficult otherwise. Takes 3
minutes.

Since I couldn't affect the course's grading scheme, these assessments
could not directly affect the students' grades. 

## Part 2: The Class

## Part 3: Conclusions
