---
title: Thing I Learned Today: Index Funds
author: Brian Shourd
date: October 29, 2012
tags: life
---

When I was in 4th or 5th grade or so, I remember one project in
particular that we had about learning to do life stuff. Everyone in the
class got to look through job ads, and pick their "job" out from
whatever was listed. Then we had to use our fake salaries to pay for
rent on houses we found in the paper, utilities, and buy groceries. We
could use the rest to buy fun stuff in catalogs (I liked the Sharper
Image at the time), and we were supposed to use a portion to invest in
the stock market. We were given a cursory introduction - I honestly
don't remember much about it - and essentially we all picked random
stock in companies that we liked and watched our investments like hawks.
The whole project took weeks, and it is one of my only memories from
grade school - that's how good this project was.

Anyway, I remember that my idea was that since I didn't know which
stocks would play out, I would just buy all of them. Then *some* of them
would have to pan out. At least, that's how I remember it happening. I
suppose it's maybe not outside the realm of possibiliy that perhaps
there is a chance that I'm remembering through rose-colored glasses.

Because it turns out to be a really good idea. A fund that invests in
every company (or a representative sample thereof) is called an [index
fund](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Index_fund). I learned about them in
a book I read called [The New Coffeehouse
Investor](http://www.coffeehouseinvestor.com/the-coffeehouse-investor-book/),
which I thoroughly enjoyed. In it, Bill Schultheis basically says that
an index fund is the only sensible long-term investment and advocates
doing nothing but investing in index funds and bonds, with a ratio
depending on the amount of risk you are willing (and able) to take on. I
liked it.

Let's see how this idea of investing in everything at once works - and
also the downsides. We'll model choosing a stock with choosing a
six-sided die from a bag of 100. Then roll the die and subtract 2 to
find out how the stock performs.

If you have 100 dollars and put all of it into one stock, you have a 1
in 3 chance of losing money, a 1 in 3 chance of a modest return (100-200
dollars), and a 1 in 3 chance of a terrific return (>200 dollars).

However, if you invest 100 dollars into 100 stocks, and you roll 100
dice, your odds shift dramatically. You now have a 99.62 percent chance
of a return between 100 and 200 dollars. Basically a sure thing. There's
only a 0.2 percent chance of losing money in this bet.

*But*, and it's a big but, there is only a 0.2 percent chance of a
stellar return either.

Now throw in the complication that in real stocks, it's not totally
random at all. People can - or at least they believe they can - predict
which stocks will do well and which ones won't. There is a real chance
of winning big - but only if you take the risk.

Anyway, that's what I learned today.
